---
title: "ANS Winter Meeting 2016 Awards"
layout: post-no-feature
date:   2017-01-04 15:00:00
keywords: ANS, american nuclear society, metastable fluids, award, awards
long_title: true
---

In late December, I received in the mail the American Nuclear Society's Young
Members' Group Best Paper award for my presentation and accompanying paper at
the 2016 ANS Winter Conference.  Professor Taleyarkhan, the corresponding
author, also received word that the paper had won the overall conference's Best
Paper Award.

<figure>
    <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/ne_news_screencap_ans_winter_2016.png" />
    <figcaption>
      Recognition of our award from Purdue's School of Nuclear Engineering
    </figcaption>
</figure>

It was an honor to receive, and it's garnered some attention from Purdue's
School of Engineering.  It's always nice to get that kind of recognition.
Because I can't publish the paper or the presentation here (for copyright and
intellectual property reasons), I've written a quick summary of the paper and
included some of the most salient figures below.

## Threshold Energy Based Active Special Nuclear Material Interrogation

**Alex Hagen, Brian Archambault, Ph.D., and Rusi Taleyarkhan, Ph.D.**

Counter terrorism is an important and ever-present concern of our times.  CBRN
defense is a common acronym to describe the wide ranging terrorism concerns,
standing for Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear.  Particularly, we
are concerned with Nuclear defense - the ability to detect and interdict those
materials that can create nuclear weapons if they are being smuggled.  These
materials (weapons grade plutonium and highly enriched uranium) are called
Special Nuclear Materials - or SNM.  If you're interested in a more in depth
description of this motivation, I'll put up a post soon.

Currently, we know that there is a weakness in our detection of SNM.  The
Congress of the United States' Budget Office sums it up this way:

> The passive radiation detectors outside shipping containers can usually
detect emissions from materials for radiological weapons but are less effective
at detecting emissions from nuclear weapons and the fissile materials used to
make them.

We presented a way to remedy this.  Our detectors, Metastable Fluid Detectors,
are more efficient than other neutron detectors, and have higher signal to
noise ratios than conventional neutron detectors because they are inherently
blind to $\gamma$ particles.  I'll post a more in depth description of our
detectors soon.

The efficiency of our detector makes it easily detect smuggled WGP.  However,
highly enriched uranium is much "quieter", it emits less neutrons from
spontaneous fission.  To remedy this, we propose a method using **active
interrogation**.  We direct a $2.45 MeV$ beam of neutrons onto the cargo, and
the fissile material (the HEU) will generate neutrons from induced fission.
Then, setting a lower level discriminator, we can detect only those fission
neutrons with energies above $2.45 MeV$, thereby not detecting any of the
interrogating neutrons.

<figure>
    <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/fission_spectrum.png" />
    <figcaption>
      Ratio of fission spectrum above the interrogation spectrum.
    </figcaption>
</figure>

With this methodology, which we call **Threshold Energy Neutron Analysis**, we
were able to get ratios between the fission neutrons and interrogation neutrons
of over $1000 \times$.  This is much much larger than that achievable with
conventional neutron detectors, which we tested to ratios of only $12 \times$,
and the literature shows similar, or worse results.  In all, this is an
interesting and useful way to interrogate cargo for special nuclear materials.

<figure>
    <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/dd_fission_ratios.png" />
    <figcaption>
      Efficiency of fission and interrogating neutrons in a CTMFD
    </figcaption>
</figure>
